In this video I'm going to talk to you about matrix multiplication so multiplying two matrices together
you will learn in this video about the mechanics of matrix multiplication so how to actually implement
the multiplication.
But before we get there you have to learn the rule for when matrix multiplication is even valid.
It is not always valid to multiply two matrices.
So I will explain what I call the inner outer rule.
And it basically works like this.
So imagine you have two matrices.
Those are represented by these boxes here.
So you have a matrix on the left and the matrix on the right and you want to multiply these two matrices.
So the first question is is it even valid to multiply these two matrices.
So the answer to that question whether this multiplication is valid comes from looking at the sizes
of the matrices.
So what you do is you line up the matrices like this and then you write down the sizes of the matrices
of this matrix is m rows by n columns and this matrix is n rows and K columns.
So now you see that when the sizes are lined up like this there's four numbers in a row M and and K
and then the question is are these two dimensions the same.
So n n n that's what I call the inner sizes.
So inner here refers to just the you know the spatial location when you line up these four numbers here.
So m rows and columns and rows and columns.
So the inner dimensions in this case match end by n.
And when these two match then the multiplication is valid and if these two inner dimensions match then
the multiplication or the size of the product matrix is given by the outer sizes here.
So m by K and that's what you see here.
So if these two sizes are different these two numbers are different than the matrix multiplication is
not valid.
Now that might seem like a strange rule.
This will make more sense in a few moments when I explain the mechanisms of matrix multiplication but
for now I think it's important to try to remember this picture this image and this idea that the inner
sizes must match and then the outer size is defined the size of the product matrix.
So let's see a few examples.
Here you see two matrices A and B.
And let's say that a is a five by two matrix.
So there are five rows and two columns.
And B is a two by seven matrix.
So there are two rows and seven columns.
So these two matrices can be multiplied together because they the inner dimensions are two and that's
the same.
And then when you multiply a by B the size of the output matrix is going to be five by seven.
All right.
Here is another example.
This is actually the same two matrices.
You can see the sizes are the same but now it's not possible to multiply these two matrices so a times
B is a valid operation but B times A is actually not a valid operation because these inner sizes here
do not match.
Okay.
And then here's another example C by a.
And here these two dimensions are not the same.
So C times A is also not a valid operation.
Let's check this out in Python so we are going to use the NUM pi module here.
I'm going to start by finding a few matrices.
These are gonna be random matrices or matrices containing random numbers.
So let's say this is like 14 by 10.
And how about B is copy and paste here.
Let's a B to B.
How about also 14 by 10.
And then maybe I'll say matrix C is 10 by 14.
So to implement matrix multiplication in python you use the at symbol in between two matrices.
So if you want to multiply A times B then this is the formulation.
This is how you set it up.
And look at this we get an error.
It says Matt moles so matrix multiplication mismatch in its core dimension.
So let's think about why that is the case.
So we are trying to multiply A times B and A is 14 by 10.
And B is also 14 by 10.
So now the inner dimensions here are not matching.
So this multiplication is not valid but let's see what we actually could multiply here.
Well we could multiply C by B for example so matrix C that's gonna be 10 by 14 and then matrix B is
14 by 10.
So the inner sizes match and the outer sizes are 10 and 10.
So let's see first of all I want to make sure that this is going to run and this does run and now I
want to check the size.
So I'm going to use a num pi function called Shape to check the the size of the shape of this matrix
and it is indeed 10 by 10.
Let's see what else we could do here.
Well we could also turn B and C around turn that multiplication around so we could multiply B times
C..
And that is valid because this would be 10 and 10.
So then I expect the resulting matrix to be of size 14 by 14.
So B and C..
Okay.
And there you go.
The shape of this product matrix of the size of this product matrix is 14 by 14.
Now that you know the rule for when multiplication is valid I want to tell you briefly about the mechanics
of matrix multiplication.
Essentially it all boils down to computing a bunch of dot products.
This is yet another example of how the dot product is a fundamental computation in linear algebra.
So here we have two matrices they're both two by two.
So the inner sizes are gonna be two and two of course and the outer sizes are also gonna be two and
two.
So this is going to be the product matrix that will be a two by two matrix what I'm going to do is build
up this matrix one element at a time.
So the first element in this matrix which is the element in the first row in the first column is the
result of computing the dot product between the first row of the Left matrix and the first column of
the right matrix.
So you see this is 0 times a plus 1 times C..
So that is the definition of the dot product.
And then.
So this was the first row in the first column to compute the element in the first column and the second
row you compute the dot product between the second row of the Left matrix and the first column of the
right matrix I think you can see where this is going.
This element up here this top right element.
This comes from the first row and the second column.
And of course this last element here comes from the dot product between the second row of the left matrix
and the second row or the second column of the right matrix so more generally every element in the product
matrix comes from the corresponding or the top product between the corresponding row in the left matrix
and the column in the right matrix.
And that description that mechanism leads to the exercise for this video.
So what I want you to do in this exercise is write a python function that will take two matrices as
input you have to first check whether the multiplication is even valid and if the multiplication is
not valid then you just produce an error message.
And if the multiplication is valid then you return the product of the multiplication between these two
matrices.
And now importantly I want you to implement matrix multiplication via dot products of rows and columns.
So basically using the mechanism that I explained in the previous slide don't just fall back on using
the at operator and the reason to do this is that writing out these algorithms and functions really
helps you understand and internalize these mathematical operations.
And of course that also helps you become a better python programmer anyway.
Very good.
So now pause the video.
Write some functions write some code.
And now I'm going to switch to Python and show you how I set up this problem so I'm going to call this
function.
Matrix multiplication and it's going to take two matrices as input a and b and the first thing we need
to do is check the sizes so check sizes and give error.
If multiplication multiplication is not valid.
So what do we want to do.
We want the inner sizes which corresponds to the number of columns in the first Matrix and the number
of rows in the second matrix.
And so to make this a little bit more convenient what I'm actually gonna do is get the matrix sizes
here so I'm gonna say size of a equals num PI that shape up a.
So using this same function that I introduced you to here and that's going to give me an output that's
going to look like this is going to be a tuple it's going to have two elements and that's going to correspond
to the number of rows and the number of columns in matrix A and then of course we need this as well
for B.
And now we can check these sizes.
So we want to see that the inner sizes match so that corresponds to the number of columns in a row.
And then I want to say if that is actually not equal to the number of rows in B then we can raise an
error message.
That's going to say array I use an array error and here I'm going to write the inner dimensions in Shin's
don't match and then I'm going to use an escape and then single quote here to make sure that this quote
is going to print.
OK.
So I would like to test just this part of the function so far before going any further.
So what I'm gonna do is run this cell to get Python to read this function to build this function.
And now I'm going to create two matrices.
Again random matrices.
Just because these are really easy to generate I don't have to worry about dealing with you know sort
of coming up with numbers on my own I don't have to worry about all the formatting for creating matrices.
So I'm going to set this first set of matrices to be valid.
So the inner dimensions here so if I'm multiplying a times b then the inner dimensions are 6 and 6.
So that should actually work.
I shouldn't get any error message.
In fact I really shouldn't get anything out of this function.
This is going to be false and then it's not going to give an error.
So let's see matrix multiplication I input a and b and I run that code and I don't get any errors.
I don't get anything.
Okay so now let's try changing it.
So now say it's six and five over here and this actually does produce an error although actually the
error was not what I was intending it to be.
This should say value error is a typo.
My apologies.
So let's see now.
This is the error is inner dimensions don't match.
All right.
And we do get the single quote here for the contraction.
Okay so that's good.
That's part of this function and that's the error checking part.
Now we need to actually implement the multiplication.
So I'm going to start by initializing the output matrix and I'll just call that C.
So this is going to be a zeros matrix and it's going to correspond to the.
Sighs Well the the outer dimensions so size of a zero and then size of B 1.
Now it's time to compute the product.
So compute.
Let's see.
So what we need to do now is loop over all of the rows in matrix A and the columns in matrix B.
So I'm gonna say for I in range of now sometimes I write it like this size a zero.
But there's actually a little bit of a simplification.
You can simply input one number into the range function and it will by default start at zero.
Sometimes I think it's a little less confusing to write it out explicitly with the zero.
But you know it's good to have multiple options anyway so we are gonna loop over the rows and then loop
over the columns in B.
So that's going to look like this.
And now we are building up this matrix element y.
So the IIS throw I should say the elements in the Iron Throne and JF column in matrix C is going to
be the dot product between each corresponding row of A and the corresponding column in B.
All right so let's see.
Change this back to 6 and we get an error.
This says Uh okay so the error is on the line computing the dot product.
And I see what the error is.
I was mindlessly just writing J comma all when it actually should be all come a J because this is the
J column not the j of the row from B all right.
Let's see.
OK.
So again we don't get any errors but I didn't actually return anything.
So this function computed C possibly correctly but it didn't actually return the matrix C.
So we need to say return c so that's going to be the output and then I will write C here.
All right.
So here we get a results.
But is this the correct result.
It didn't produce any python errors but that doesn't necessarily mean that I've done the right thing
in terms of math.
So in order to check this what I'm going to do is compare this output against the output of Python's
built in matrix multiplication.
So here are going to use the app operator the at symbol for matrix multiplication.
So now I compute C1 and C2 and then the idea is that if c 1 is equal to C2 which means that I have written
the correct algorithm here then we should see that this result is going to be all zeros.
And remarkably enough we get a full matrix of zeros.
And I guess you know maybe it's nice to see that these really are different.
So I will print out maybe it looks a little bit better if I do it this way.
Print like this.
Okay.
So here you see that C1 gives us some result and then C1 minus C2 gives us all zeros which means that
C2 is the same thing and C one which means that our algorithm is correct.
Now needless to say as I've mentioned several times before in this course you really shouldn't be implementing
matrix multiplication this way.
You should always do it this way but it's nice to see the algorithm written out so that the mathematics
is a lot less mysterious and complicated.
In this video you learn the mechanics of matrix multiplication and you saw another application of the
dot product and you also learn the inner or outer rule of when it's valid to multiply two matrices.